The following code was used to generate model results for the manuscript "Comparing piston flow and dispersion models for the age of groundwater collected through very short screens" submitted to Water Resources Research. This code was used to evaluate the validity of the assumption that groundwater collected through sampling probes with short (5 cm) screens have an age range so narrow that it can reasonably be considered a single age (a piston flow interpretation). This assumption was evaluated by re-examining age-dating tracer data from two previous studies in which groundwater was collected beneath coastal plain streams through screens 5 cm in length (Gilmore et al. 2016: https://doi.org/10.1002/2015WR017600; Jensen et al. 2024: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c06697). Five age-dating tracer signals (SF6, 3H, 3Hetrit, 3H0, 3H/3H0) were fit to two lumped parameter models: the piston flow model (PFM), and the dispersion model (DM) which allows for a range of ages in a samples.
This code works by using the PFM and DM to predict modeled age-dating tracer concentrations which are then compared to the measured concentrations from Gilmore et al. (2016) and Jensen et al. (2024) using the chi-square statistic. Modeled concentrations are calculated using a convolution approach in which time series of age-dating tracer inputs to the aquifer are convoluted with a transit time distribution (TTD or age-distribution) predicted by each model. Data on atmospheric SF6 concentrations (Maiss and Brenninkmeijer 1998: https://doi.org/10.1021/es9802807; Jurgens et al., 2012: https://doi.org/10.3133/tm4F3 ; Dutton et al., 2023: https://doi.org/10.15138/TQ02-ZX42) and tritium measurements/estimates in precipitation (Jurgens 2023: https://doi.org/10.5066/P92CEFXN ) were used as model inputs. Equations for the TTDs of both the PFM and DM are from Jurgens et al. (2012). The PFM has one parameter (groundwater age) used to predict the TTD while the DM has two parameters (mean age and the dispersion parameter (DP)) used to predict the TTD. Modeled tracer concentrations were calculated for the PFM for ages between 0 and 70 years in 1/12 year (monthly) intervals. For the DM, modeled tracer concentrations were calculated for every combination of mean age between 0 and 70 years (1/12 year intervals) and DP between 0.001 and 3 (0.001 intervals). For each model, the set of parameters that produces modeled tracer concentrations that minimizes the chi-square error between measured and modeled concentrations is considered the "best-fit" model.
